Version 1.0.0 (#35)
balena-io-modules/mahler: README.md

# Mahler

A automated task composer and [HTN](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hierarchical_task_network) based planner for building autonomous system agents in typescript.

> **NOTE** even though this project is on its v1, we still consider it experimental, as we are continue exploring different mechanisms to improve efficiency of various aspects of the framework. This project does adhere to the [semantic versioning guidelines](https://semver.org/), so we wont perform any breaking API changes without a major version bump.

Reviewer: `we are continue` -> `we continue`

## Features

> - Simple API. Define primitive tasks by declaring the `effect` it has on the system state, a `condition` for the task to be chosen, and an `action`, which is the asynchronous operation that will be performed on the system if the task is chosen for the plan. Tasks can be used by other compound tasks (or _methods_), to guide the planner towards a desired behavior.

Reviewer: `, to guide` -> `to guide`

- Highly configurable `Agent` interface allows to create autonomous agents to serve a wide variety of use cases. Create a single shot agent to just reach a specific goal, or create a service agent that keeps monitoring the state of the world and making changes as needed to keep the system on target. Agents support re-planning if the state of the system changes during the plan execution or errors occur while executing actions. This runtime context can be used as feedback to the planning stage to chose different paths if needed.

> - Observable runtime. The agent runtime state and knowledge of the world can be monitored at all times, with different levels of detail. Human readable metadata for tasks can be provided via the task `description` property. Plug in a logger to generate human readable logs.

Reviewer: `, with different levels` -> `with different levels`

## Requirements

- Node.js 18+. Other runtimes are unsupported at this moment.

## Installation

```
npm install --save mahler
```

## Core Concepts

- **Autonomous system agent** a process on a system that needs to operate with little or not feedback from the outside world. An autonomous agent needs to be able to recover from failures and adapt if conditions on the system change while performing its duties. In our definition, such an agent operates based on a given goal and will keep trying to achieve the goal until the goal changes or some other exit conditions are met.
- **Hierarchical Task Network (HTN)** is a type of automated planning system that allows to define actions in the planning domain in a hierarchical manner, allowing actions to be re-used as part of compound tasks. This reduces the search domain and provides developers more control on what plans are preferable (over something like [STRIPS](https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/STRIPS)). This has made this type of system popular in [game design](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kXm467TFTcY).

> - **Task** a task is any operation defined by a domain expert to provide to the planner. A task can be a primitive task, called an _action_ on this framework, e.g. "download a file", "write X to the database", or a _method_, i.e. a compound task, that provides a sequence of steps to follow.

Reviewer: `, called an` -> `called an`

Author: This one I'm not so sure about, it seems like the pause of the comma is needed here

const counterAgent = Agent.from({
	initial: 0,
	tasks: [plusOne],
});

// This tells the agent to find a plan from the current
// state (0) to the target state (3).
counterAgent.seek(3);

// Wait for the agent to terminate
const res = await counterAgent.wait();
if (res.success) {
	console.log(res.state); // 3
}
```

The above code now initializes the agent with `plusOne` as its only task and tells it to find a plan that gets the system to a state equal to `3`. The agent internal planner will calculate a plan with 3 actions which the agent will execute before stopping.

The planner can be invoked directly, this is useful for testing our actions

```typescript
import { Planner } from 'mahler/planner';
import { plan, stringify } from 'mahler/testing';

// Create a new planner
const planner = Planner.from({ tasks: [plusOne] });

// Find a plan from 0 to 3
const res = planner.findPlan(0, 3);
expect(stringify(res)).to.deep.equal(sequence('+1', '+1', '+1'));
```

The code above uses the `Planner` instance exposed under the `mahler/planner` namespace as well as a couple of testing utilities. We'll learn more about these utilities further ahead.

## Actions

> The previous code only acts on the internal state of the agent, and doesn't perform any IO. In fact, the `effect` function should **NEVER** perform IO as this function may be called multiple times during the planning process while searching for a path to the target.

Author: Perhaps I should change it to 'side effects' to avoid ambiguity, let me think about it for a bit

> The previous code only acts on the internal state of the agent, and doesn't perform any IO. In fact, the `effect` function should **NEVER** perform IO as this function may be called multiple times during the planning process while searching for a path to the target.

Author: What about now @lmbarros ?

		state.counter < target.counter &&
		// We'll only update the counter if we know the internal counter is
		// synchronized with the stored state
		(state.lastRead == null ||
			state.lastRead + MAX_READ_DELAY_MS >= performance.now()),
	// The task has the effect of updating the counter and modifying the write requirement
	// We no longer need to set an action as this operation no longer performs IO
	effect: (state) => {
		state._.counter++;
		state._.needsWrite = false;
	},
	description: '+1',
});
```

The tasks above now will make sure that no counter changes can happen if more than 1 second had passed since the last read, that condition will make sure a `read` operation is added first to the plan. A `store` will happen only once the counter target has been reached, this ensures that this action is always put last on the plan. This can be tested as follows.

```typescript
const planner = Planner.from({ tasks: [plusOne, read, store] });

// Find a plan from 0 to 3
const res = planner.findPlan(
	{ counter: 0, needsWrite: false },
	{ counter: 3, needsWrite: false },
);
expect(stringify(res)).to.deep.equal(
	sequence('readCounter', '+1', '+1', '+1', 'storeCounter'),
);
```

> We have not yet talked about the second argument to task properties. Until now, we have used [object destructuring](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/Destructuring_assignment) to get the `target`, property. The second argument is called the `Context` object and it contains relevant metadata about the planning context where the task is being used. We'll talk more about the context argument when we talk about [Lenses](#lenses). For now let us dive into the target property and the target state property.

Author: Hmm, good point. When constructing a task, the given function properties (condition, effect, action, methods) receive two arguments, the state (or a view to the state) and a context argument. This line made more sense with the previous version of the API where we used the context argument more in the examples. I'll change this so it makes more sense

> We have not yet talked about the second argument to task properties. Until now, we have used [object destructuring](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/Destructuring_assignment) to get the `target`, property. The second argument is called the `Context` object and it contains relevant metadata about the planning context where the task is being used. We'll talk more about the context argument when we talk about [Lenses](#lenses). For now let us dive into the target property and the target state property.

Author: Let me know if it's clearer now @lmbarros

});

const plusTwo = Task.from<number>({
	// We want this method to be chosen only if the difference between the current
	// state and the target is bigger than one
	condition: (state, { target }) => target - state > 1,
	// Defining the method property makes this task into a method
	// A method should not modify the state, just return a sequence of applicable actions
	method: (_, { target }) => [plusOne({ target }), plusOne({ target })],
	description: '+2',
});
```

Now there is a lot happening here. We have replaced `effect` and `action` in the task constructor with method. We are also directly using the `plusOne` task as a function and passing the target as one of the properties of the argument object. Let's parse this example piece by piece.

The code above is the way to create composite tasks in Mahler, called methods. Using `method` tells the task constructor to return a `MethodTask` instead of an `ActionTask` (like `plusOne`).

```typescript
// Inspecting the plusTwo variable shows that this variable is of type `MethodTask`
const plusTwo = Task.from<number>({
	// The rest of the properties goes here
	method: (_, { target }) => [plusOne({ target }), plusOne({ target })],

> });

Author: Actually this snippet was meant to be part of a deconstruction of the code above but I agree it doesn't add much. I'll remove it

```typescript
import { mermaid } from 'mahler/testing';

// Create a tracer using the mermaid tool.
const trace = mermaid();
const planner = Planner.from({
	tasks: [plusOne, plusTwo],
	// Pass the trace as a configuration option to the planner
	config: { trace },
});

// Find a plan from 0 to 3
const res = planner.findPlan(0, 3);

// render() returns a mermaid valid graph
console.log(trace.render());
```

Passing the output to the [Mermaid Live Editor](https://mermaid.live) will produce the following diagram.

```mermaid
graph TD
    start(( ))
    start -.- d0{ }
    d0 -.- f751444[["+2"]]
    f751444 -.- b795d43("+1")
    b795d43 -.- 4eb0bdd("+1")
    4eb0bdd -.- d1{ }
    d1 -.- 580ece0[["+2"]]
    580ece0 -.- 580ece0-err[ ]
    580ece0-err:::error
    d1 -.- d634a71("+1")
    d634a71 -.- stop(( ))
    stop:::finish
    classDef finish stroke:#000,fill:#000
    start:::selected
    start --> b795d43
    b795d43:::selected
    b795d43 --> 4eb0bdd
    4eb0bdd:::selected
    4eb0bdd --> d634a71
    d634a71:::selected
    d634a71 --> stop
    classDef error stroke:#f00
    classDef selected stroke:#0f0
```

> In the diagram, the nodes connected via the dotted lines show the planning process, while nodes connected via the solid arrows show the resulting plan. The diagram shows how the planner tries first the `+2` method, which results into the expansion `('+1', '+1')`, a second tries fails, because the condition no longer holds, so the planner adds a `+1` action next, which allows the planner to reach the target. If we compare this diagram with one where the planner doesn't know have the `plusTwo` method, we get.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the diagram, the nodes connected via the dotted lines show the planning process, while nodes connected via the solid arrows show the resulting plan. The diagram shows how the planner tries first the `+2` method, which results into the expansion `('+1', '+1')`, a second try fails, because the condition no longer holds, so the planner adds a `+1` action next, which allows the planner to reach the target.

Let's compare this diagram with one where the planner doesn't know the `plusTwo` method. This new diagram looks like this:
```

	description: '+3',
});
```

Methods, however cannot call themselves recursively or as part of call chain. This is forbidden to prevent infinite recursion. Using recursion means the method will effectively never be called.

## Lenses

Let's say now that we want our agent to manage multiple counters. Let's redefine our system state once more to do this

```typescript
type System = { counters: { [key: string]: number } };
```

We can now easily (?) redefine our `plusOne` task to handle this case.

```typescript
const plusOne = Task.from<System>({
	// This task will be chosen only if one of the keys is smaller than the target
	condition: (state, { target }) =>
		Object.keys(state.counters).some(
			(k) => state.counters[k] < target.counters[k],
		),
	effect: (state, { target }) => {
		// We find the first counter below the target, we know it exists because of
		// the condition so we use the non-null assertion (!) at the end
		const key = Object.keys(state._.counters).find(
			(k) => state._.counters[k] < target.counters[k],
		)!;

		// Update the changed counter
		state._.counters[key]++;
	},
	description: '+1',
});
```

> The above code achieves the same as the single counter `plusOne` (increase one of the counters), but is a bit convoluted, and we cannot tell from the description which counter will be increased. We can improve this setting the `lens` property when defining the action.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The above code achieves the same as the single counter `plusOne` (increase one of the counters), but is a bit convoluted, and we cannot tell from the description which counter will be increased. We can improve this by setting the `lens` property when defining the action.
```

My brain parsed the text as "We can improve this by setting". The "by" helps to direct the brain parser to the right path without backtracking :-)

```typescript
const plusOne = Task.of<System>().from({
	// The lens defines the part of the state where this task is applicable
	// this property defaults to '/', meaning the root object
	lens: '/counters/:counterId',
	condition: (counter, { target }) => counter < target,
	effect: (counter) => ++counter._,
	description: ({ counterId }) => `${counterId} + 1`,
});
```

> We are again introducing a few new things here, but hopefully the code above is relatively intuitive. This declares `plusOne` as a task on the `System` type, but that acts on a specific counter, specified by the lens property. Since we don't know a priori which counter this will apply to, we replace the name of the counter with the placeholder variable, `:counterId`. This variable is passed as part of the context to the task constructor properties, we can see this in the use of the value by the description which now we see that it can also be a function acting on the context.

Reviewer 2: Too many concepts in that last sentence, IMO. Here's my attempt to split them into separate sentences:

```suggestion
We are again introducing a few new things here, but hopefully the code above is relatively intuitive. This declares `plusOne` as a task on the `System` type, but that acts on a specific counter, specified by the lens property. Since we don't know a priori which counter this will apply to, we replace the name of the counter with the placeholder variable, `:counterId`. This variable is passed as part of the context to the task constructor properties. We can see this in the definition of `description`, where we use `counterID`.  By the way, this also shows that the description can also be a function acting on the context.
```

Note also that instead of the usual `Task.from` we preface the `from` call with a `Task.of` with a generic type argument. This is because of a limitation in typescript that does not allow it to [perform partial inference of generic types](https://github.com/microsoft/TypeScript/issues/10571). We'll see later how we can shorten this call.

Now we can go a bit deeper on the context object, we mentioned before that it contains the context from the task selection process during planning. More specifically, the context object is composed by

- A `target` property, with the expected target value for the part of the state that the task acts on. This will have the same type as the first argument of the function, which will match the type pointed by the `lens` property. We'll see when we talk about [operations](#operations) that this property is not present for delete or wildcard (`*`) operation.

> - A `system` property, providing a copy of the global state at the moment the task is used. This can be used, for instance, to define tasks with conditions on parts of the system that are unrelated to the sub-object pointed to by the lens.

Reviewer 2: This is easily abusable, right? I can imagine agents getting hard to understand and maintain if this is used too much. (Not unlike global variables, which are the obvious comparison.) So:

* Is this here because of some perceived use case, or "just in case"?
* Should we at least warn users against it?

Author: I guess it depends on the state model, but I know of a few use cases. For instance, for service orchestration, services can have a `dependsOn` property. I don't know if there is a good way to define conditions for that property without the service task being able to access information about the rest of the services. The example for WifiConnect at the bottom of the readme has other instance of that.

I was hesitant to add the system property for the same reasons you point out, but I decided it was necessary.

We can add some note regarding the use of the `system` property, something on the lines "if you find that you are using the system property too much, consider modifying the model"

Author: I added a note, let me know what you think

- A `path` property, indicating the full path of the lens where the task is being applied.
- Zero or more properties with the names of the placeholders in the lens definition. For instance is the lens is `/a/:aId/b/:bId/c/:cId`, `aId`, `bId`, and `cId` will be provided in the context, with the right type for the property position in the given path.

> The name _lens_ comes from the [lens concept in functional programming](https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Haskell/Lenses_and_functional_references), that are these structures that provide a view into a specific part of an object, allowing to read and modifies values without needing to manipulate the full object. They can be thought as analogous to database views. However, unlike traditional database views or functional lenses, in order to make lenses useful in the context of tasks we need them to be bi-directional, that is, a modification to the contents of the view should affect the original data and vice-versa. For now the only supported lens allows us to _focus_ into a specific sub-property of the system model, however, we would like to add some more powerful lenses in the future based on existing work in this area (see the work by [Foster et al](https://www.cis.upenn.edu/~bcpierce/papers/lenses-toplas-final.pdf), [Hoffman et al](http://dmwit.com/papers/201107EL.pdf) and [Project Cambria](https://www.inkandswitch.com/cambria/)).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The name _lens_ comes from the [lens concept in functional programming](https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Haskell/Lenses_and_functional_references), that are these structures that provide a view into a specific part of an object, allowing to read and modify values without needing to manipulate the full object. They can be thought as analogous to database views. However, unlike traditional database views or functional lenses, in order to make lenses useful in the context of tasks we need them to be bi-directional, that is, a modification to the contents of the view should affect the original data and vice-versa. For now the only supported lens allows us to _focus_ into a specific sub-property of the system model, however, we would like to add some more powerful lenses in the future based on existing work in this area (see the work by [Foster et al](https://www.cis.upenn.edu/~bcpierce/papers/lenses-toplas-final.pdf), [Hoffman et al](http://dmwit.com/papers/201107EL.pdf) and [Project Cambria](https://www.inkandswitch.com/cambria/)).
```

> We hope this also explains why the name `View` was chosen to pass [references to effect and action functions](#basic-usage), changes to the view are indeed propagated to the global state object.

Reviewer 2: Are those what previously you called `Pointer`s? I like this new name!

Author: I don't think I called it `Pointer` on the readme, I was called `Ref` when I first redesigned it, but I settled on `View` while doing the refactor. Pointer and Ref still exist on the codebase, but I like View as an user facing name

        47bcbb6 -.- d3{ }
        d3 -.- a48a56b("b + 1")
        a48a56b -.- stop(( ))
        stop:::finish
        classDef finish stroke:#000,fill:#000
        start:::selected
        start --> 4418a5c
        4418a5c:::selected
        4418a5c --> a53644f
        a53644f:::selected
        a53644f --> 47bcbb6
        47bcbb6:::selected
        47bcbb6 --> a48a56b
        a48a56b:::selected
        a48a56b --> stop
        classDef error stroke:#f00
        classDef selected stroke:#0f0
```

Even though the `a + 1` and `b + 1` actions modify totally different parts of the state, the planner still comes up with a sequential plan. This is a limitation of the planner right now, that we intend to improve in the future. Not all is bad news though, the planner does support parallel planning for methods. Let's define a generic `nPlusOne` task that increases any pending counters.

```typescript
const nPlusOne = Task.of<System>().from({
	lens: '/counters',
	condition: (counters, { target }) =>
		Object.keys(counters).some((k) => counters[k] < target[k]),
	method: (counters, { target }) =>
		Object.keys(counters).map((k) =>
			plusOne({ counterId: k, target: target[k] }),

> 		),

Reviewer 2: So, if am following this right, the resulting method will include a `plusOne` to each of the counters. What if some of them is already at the target? I guess this will simply let the `plusOne` condition do its job and no issues will arise. Or maybe I missed some point?

Regardless, this example was more eyebrow-raising than the others.

Author: It is missing a filter, nice catch

Author: This still works as the condition in the `plusOne` action does its job, otherwise [this test](https://github.com/balena-io-modules/mahler/blob/5d748808cdb68f15fb718c24cfcaa79176372fce/tests/readme/examples.spec.ts#L407-L415) would fail, but the method is indeed missing a filter

if (res.success) {
	console.log(res.state); // 3
}
```

The above code now initializes the agent with `plusOne` as its only task and tells it to find a plan that gets the system to a state equal to `3`. The agent internal planner will calculate a plan with 3 actions which the agent will execute before stopping.

The planner can be invoked directly, this is useful for testing our actions

```typescript
import { Planner } from 'mahler/planner';
import { plan, stringify } from 'mahler/testing';

// Create a new planner
const planner = Planner.from({ tasks: [plusOne] });

// Find a plan from 0 to 3
const res = planner.findPlan(0, 3);
expect(stringify(res)).to.deep.equal(sequence('+1', '+1', '+1'));
```

The code above uses the `Planner` instance exposed under the `mahler/planner` namespace as well as a couple of testing utils. We'll learn more about these utilities further ahead.

## Actions

The previous code only acts on the internal state of the agent, and doesn't perform any IO. In fact, the `effect` function should **never** perform IO as this function may be called multiple times during the planning process while searching for a path to the target.

> In order to perform IO, an `action` property can be provides to the task definition. If not provided, the `Task.from` constructor will use effect function as the action. Let's imagine we want the `plusOne` task from the previous example to store the value of the counter somewhere for later retrieval using an async `storeCounter` function that returns the stored value on success. Here is how that is implemented with Mahler.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In order to perform IO, an `action` property can be provided to the task definition. If not provided, the `Task.from` constructor will use effect function as the action. Let's imagine we want the `plusOne` task from the previous example to store the value of the counter somewhere for later retrieval using an async `storeCounter` function that returns the stored value on success. Here is how that is implemented with Mahler.
```

```typescript
import { UNDEFINED } from 'mahler';

// This won't find a plan since we have no action defined to
// delete the lastRead property
const res = planner.findPlan(
	{ counter: 0, needsWrite: false },
	{ counter: 3, lastRead: UNDEFINED },
);
```

The example above is a bit nonsensical, but it shows how the `UNDEFINED` symbol would be used. This tells the planner that we want the `lastRead` property removed from the state object, so the planner would look for a task that results in the deletion of that property. Note that this is different than setting the value to `undefined`. The difference is shown below

```typescript
// If successful, it should result in the following state: {counter: 3, needsWrite: true}
agent.seek({ counter: 3, lastRead: UNDEFINED });

// If successful, it should result in the following state: {counter: 3, needsWrite: true, lastRead: undefined}
agent.seek({ counter: 3, lastRead: undefined });
```

We'll learn later how we can add an `op` property to tasks to tell Mahler when a task is applicable to a `delete` operation.

One last thing before moving on from this topic. What if you assign a required value the value of `UNDEFINED`?
/inv

```typescript

> // Compilation fais with: `type symbol is not assignable to number|undefined`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
// Compilation fails with: `type symbol is not assignable to number|undefined`
```

Now, as programmers, we want to be able to build code by composing simpler behaviors into more complex ones. We might want to guide the planner towards a specific solution, using the primitives we already have. For instance, let's say we want to help the planner get to a solution faster as increasing one by one takes too much time. We want to define a `plusTwo` task, that increases the counter by `2`. We could create another primitive task to update the counter by two, but as programmers, we would like to reuse the code we have already defined. We can do that using methods.

```typescript
// We'll go back to the simpler definition for this example
const plusOne = Task.from({
	condition: (state: number, { target }) => state < target,
	effect: (state: number) => state + 1,
	description: '+1',
});

const plusTwo = Task.from({
	// We want this method to be chosen only if the difference between the current
	// state and the target is bigger than one
	condition: (state: number, { target }) => target - state > 1,
	// Defining the method property makes this task into a method
	method: (_: number, { target }) => [plusOne({ target }), plusOne({ target })],
	description: '+2',
});
```

> Now there is a lot happening here. We have replaced `effect` and `action` in the task constructor with method. We are also directly using the `plusOne` task as a function and passing the target as one of the properties of the argument object. The code above is the way to create composite tasks in `Mahler`, called methods. Using `method` tells the task constructor to return a `MethodTask` instead of an `ActionTask`. Objects generated by the task constructor are callable, and receive part of the `Context` as the argument. Passing the context to a task _grounds_ the task, and this happens normally as part of the planning process. However, we reuse this mechanism to be able to reuse tasks as part of methods. In fact, the return value is also callable.

Reviewer 2: > Passing the context to a task _grounds_ the task, and this happens normally as part of the planning process.

What does "ground" mean in this context? From what I get here, we are creating an "instance" of the task bound to the passed context, but I am not sure I am getting the whole idea. A link here would probably be nice, as "ground" is not very Googleable.

Author: Hmm, perhaps using "grounding" is a bit confusing. "Binding the task" to the context as you put it sounds more intuitive. I use grounding in the sense of https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ground_expression, but that might not be the right usage.
